README.md, before:

# Family Tree Static Site (Eleventy)

This project builds a static family-tree website from folder-based markdown data.

Auth planning artifacts:

- `docs/auth-requirements.md`
- `docs/auth-implementation-plan.md`
- `docs/deploy-docker-compose.md`

## Install

```bash
npm install
```

## Configure with `.env` (recommended)

Copy the template and edit values as needed:

```bash
cp .env.example .env
```

Environment variables (all optional):

- `FAMILY_DATA_DIR` (default: `examples/royal-family-files`)
- `FAMILY_ROOT_PERSON` (default: empty; auto-picks root)
- `SITE_INPUT_DIR` (default: `site`)
- `SITE_INCLUDES_DIR` (default: `_includes`)
- `SITE_DATA_DIR` (default: `_data`)
- `SITE_OUTPUT_DIR` (default: `output`)
- `AVATARS_SUBDIR` (default: `avatars`)
- `ELEVENTY_PATH_PREFIX` (default: `/`)
- `AUTH_HOST` (default: `127.0.0.1`)
- `AUTH_PORT` (default: `8082`)
- `SESSION_TTL_HOURS` (default: `8`)
- `SUPPORT_CONTACT_EMAIL` (default: `family-admin@example.com`)
- `GOOGLE_CLIENT_ID` (required for secure mode)
- `SESSION_SECRET` (required for secure mode, at least 16 chars)
- `ALLOWED_EMAILS` (required for secure mode, comma-separated)
- `TRUST_PROXY` (default: `0`; set `1` behind HTTPS reverse proxy)
- `APP_DOMAIN` (used by TLS docker-compose overlay)
- `GHCR_IMAGE` (optional; used by `docker-compose.ghcr.yml`)

## Build

With `.env` defaults:

```bash
npm run build
```

The generated static site is written to `SITE_OUTPUT_DIR` (default `output/`).

Override a value ad-hoc without editing `.env`:

```bash
FAMILY_DATA_DIR=examples/my-family-files npm run build
```

Optionally select an explicit root person:

```bash
FAMILY_DATA_DIR=examples/my-family-files FAMILY_ROOT_PERSON="Jane Doe" npm run build
```

Build for a GitHub Pages project path (for example `/my-repo/`):

```bash
ELEVENTY_PATH_PREFIX=/my-repo/ npm run build
```

Quick test with the fake Smith dataset:

```bash
FAMILY_DATA_DIR=examples/smith-family-files npm run build
```

## Run locally

```bash
npm start
```

Important: `npm run start` (`eleventy --serve`) also rebuilds from source, so it uses the same env vars as build.

Use a non-default family source while serving:

```bash
FAMILY_DATA_DIR=examples/smith-family-files npm run start
```

Open a specific person by ID (auto-expand ancestors + highlight row):

```text
http://localhost:8080/?pid=<person-id>
```

## Secure mode (Google login + email allowlist)

This mode gates the generated site behind server-side authentication and an email allowlist.

Important: this requires a self-hosted Node server. Pure GitHub Pages static hosting cannot enforce server-side auth for all file access.

Minimal `.env` values:

```bash
GOOGLE_CLIENT_ID=your_google_web_client_id
SESSION_SECRET=replace-with-long-random-secret
ALLOWED_EMAILS=personA@gmail.com,personB@hotmail.com
SUPPORT_CONTACT_EMAIL=family-admin@example.com
```

Run secure mode locally:

```bash
npm run start:secure
```

or build and serve separately:

```bash
npm run build
npm run serve:secure
```

Then open:

```text
http://127.0.0.1:8082
```

## Docker / Docker Compose

Quick start (HTTP):

```bash
docker compose up -d --build
```

Production with HTTPS (recommended):

```bash
docker compose -f docker-compose.yml -f docker-compose.tls.yml up -d --build
```

Use prebuilt GHCR image instead of local build:

```bash
docker compose -f docker-compose.ghcr.yml -f docker-compose.tls.yml pull
docker compose -f docker-compose.ghcr.yml -f docker-compose.tls.yml up -d
```

Full deployment steps are documented in:

- `docs/deploy-docker-compose.md`

Google Cloud setup note:

- Create an OAuth 2.0 Client ID for Web.
- Add your local/dev/prod origins to Authorized JavaScript origins (for example `http://127.0.0.1:8082`).

## Source data format

- Person file: `Person Name.md`
- Marriage folder: `Person A & Person B/` containing `_marriage.md`
- Children: person files inside the marriage folder

## Photos

Default (no frontmatter changes needed):

- Place sibling image with same basename as person markdown file.
- Fallback extension order is:
  1. `.png`
  2. `.jpg`
  3. `.jpeg`
  4. `.webp`
  5. `.avif`

Optional override in frontmatter:

```yaml
photo: ./Person Name.png
```

or

```yaml
photo: https://example.com/person.png
```

## Stable Person IDs and Avatar Output

- Each person markdown file is expected to have `full_name` in frontmatter.
- During build, if `id` is missing in a person file, it is auto-generated and written back once.
- Existing `id` values are preserved.
- Local person photos are copied to:
  - `<SITE_OUTPUT_DIR>/<AVATARS_SUBDIR>/<person-id>.<ext>`
- Generated HTML uses `/<AVATARS_SUBDIR>/<person-id>.<ext>` paths (with Eleventy path prefix applied).

Generate demo photos automatically for the current royal dataset:

```bash
npm run photos:demo
```

## GitHub Pages

A workflow is provided at `.github/workflows/deploy-pages.yml`.
It builds the site and deploys `SITE_OUTPUT_DIR` to GitHub Pages.

This workflow is for public static hosting. If you need access control with allowlisted emails, deploy secure mode to your own server/VPS instead of GitHub Pages.

Docker image publishing workflow:

- `.github/workflows/docker-image.yml` pushes image to GHCR on `main`.

For CI configuration, set repository Variables in GitHub (`Settings -> Secrets and variables -> Actions -> Variables`) such as:

- `FAMILY_DATA_DIR`
- `FAMILY_ROOT_PERSON`
- `SITE_OUTPUT_DIR`
- `AVATARS_SUBDIR`

Commit message:

Document auth flow and README cleanup
- 📝 Added a dedicated auth flow sequence doc with Mermaid diagram.
- 📚 Linked the new auth flow doc from README auth artifacts.
- 🔒 Removed GitHub Pages guidance and clarified self-hosted secure deployment.

Tasks: #docs

README.md, after:

# Family Tree Static Site (Eleventy)

This project builds a static family-tree website from folder-based markdown data.

Auth planning artifacts:

- `docs/auth-requirements.md`
- `docs/auth-implementation-plan.md`
- `docs/deploy-docker-compose.md`
- `docs/auth-flow-sequence.md`

## Install

```bash
npm install
```

## Configure with `.env` (recommended)

Copy the template and edit values as needed:

```bash
cp .env.example .env
```

Environment variables (all optional):

- `FAMILY_DATA_DIR` (default: `examples/royal-family-files`)
- `FAMILY_ROOT_PERSON` (default: empty; auto-picks root)
- `SITE_INPUT_DIR` (default: `site`)
- `SITE_INCLUDES_DIR` (default: `_includes`)
- `SITE_DATA_DIR` (default: `_data`)
- `SITE_OUTPUT_DIR` (default: `output`)
- `AVATARS_SUBDIR` (default: `avatars`)
- `ELEVENTY_PATH_PREFIX` (default: `/`)
- `AUTH_HOST` (default: `127.0.0.1`)
- `AUTH_PORT` (default: `8082`)
- `SESSION_TTL_HOURS` (default: `8`)
- `SUPPORT_CONTACT_EMAIL` (default: `family-admin@example.com`)
- `GOOGLE_CLIENT_ID` (required for secure mode)
- `SESSION_SECRET` (required for secure mode, at least 16 chars)
- `ALLOWED_EMAILS` (required for secure mode, comma-separated)
- `TRUST_PROXY` (default: `0`; set `1` behind HTTPS reverse proxy)
- `APP_DOMAIN` (used by TLS docker-compose overlay)
- `GHCR_IMAGE` (optional; used by `docker-compose.ghcr.yml`)

## Build

With `.env` defaults:

```bash
npm run build
```

The generated static site is written to `SITE_OUTPUT_DIR` (default `output/`).

Override a value ad-hoc without editing `.env`:

```bash
FAMILY_DATA_DIR=examples/my-family-files npm run build
```

Optionally select an explicit root person:

```bash
FAMILY_DATA_DIR=examples/my-family-files FAMILY_ROOT_PERSON="Jane Doe" npm run build
```

Build for a subpath deployment (for example `/family-tree/` behind a reverse proxy):

```bash
ELEVENTY_PATH_PREFIX=/my-repo/ npm run build
```

Quick test with the fake Smith dataset:

```bash
FAMILY_DATA_DIR=examples/smith-family-files npm run build
```

## Run locally

```bash
npm start
```

Important: `npm run start` (`eleventy --serve`) also rebuilds from source, so it uses the same env vars as build.

Use a non-default family source while serving:

```bash
FAMILY_DATA_DIR=examples/smith-family-files npm run start
```

Open a specific person by ID (auto-expand ancestors + highlight row):

```text
http://localhost:8080/?pid=<person-id>
```

## Secure mode (Google login + email allowlist)

This mode gates the generated site behind server-side authentication and an email allowlist.

Important: this requires a self-hosted Node server. Do not expose `SITE_OUTPUT_DIR` directly via an unauthenticated public static host.

Minimal `.env` values:

```bash
GOOGLE_CLIENT_ID=your_google_web_client_id
SESSION_SECRET=replace-with-long-random-secret
ALLOWED_EMAILS=personA@gmail.com,personB@hotmail.com
SUPPORT_CONTACT_EMAIL=family-admin@example.com
```

Run secure mode locally:

```bash
npm run start:secure
```

or build and serve separately:

```bash
npm run build
npm run serve:secure
```

Then open:

```text
http://127.0.0.1:8082
```

## Docker / Docker Compose

Quick start (HTTP):

```bash
docker compose up -d --build
```

Production with HTTPS (recommended):

```bash
docker compose -f docker-compose.yml -f docker-compose.tls.yml up -d --build
```

Use prebuilt GHCR image instead of local build:

```bash
docker compose -f docker-compose.ghcr.yml -f docker-compose.tls.yml pull
docker compose -f docker-compose.ghcr.yml -f docker-compose.tls.yml up -d
```

Full deployment steps are documented in:

- `docs/deploy-docker-compose.md`

Google Cloud setup note:

- Create an OAuth 2.0 Client ID for Web.
- Add your local/dev/prod origins to Authorized JavaScript origins (for example `http://127.0.0.1:8082`).

## Source data format

- Person file: `Person Name.md`
- Marriage folder: `Person A & Person B/` containing `_marriage.md`
- Children: person files inside the marriage folder

## Photos

Default (no frontmatter changes needed):

- Place sibling image with same basename as person markdown file.
- Fallback extension order is:
  1. `.png`
  2. `.jpg`
  3. `.jpeg`
  4. `.webp`
  5. `.avif`

Optional override in frontmatter:

```yaml
photo: ./Person Name.png
```

or

```yaml
photo: https://example.com/person.png
```

## Stable Person IDs and Avatar Output

- Each person markdown file is expected to have `full_name` in frontmatter.
- During build, if `id` is missing in a person file, it is auto-generated and written back once.
- Existing `id` values are preserved.
- Local person photos are copied to:
  - `<SITE_OUTPUT_DIR>/<AVATARS_SUBDIR>/<person-id>.<ext>`
- Generated HTML uses `/<AVATARS_SUBDIR>/<person-id>.<ext>` paths (with Eleventy path prefix applied).

Generate demo photos automatically for the current royal dataset:

```bash
npm run photos:demo
```

## CI/CD

Docker image publishing workflow:

- `.github/workflows/docker-image.yml` pushes image to GHCR on `main`.

For CI configuration, set repository Variables in GitHub (`Settings -> Secrets and variables -> Actions -> Variables`) such as:

- `FAMILY_DATA_DIR`
- `FAMILY_ROOT_PERSON`
- `SITE_OUTPUT_DIR`
- `AVATARS_SUBDIR`
